---
layout: page
title: P08CR0101
permalink: /cpp/p08/cr0101
---

{% comment %}
Not sure this is the best way to do this, but it gives us a nicely formatted thing to give back to the student so... we make do.
{% endcomment %}

<a name="p01cr0101-code"></a>Code
=================================
This has been slightly reformatted; the code has had tabs replaced by spaces, most notably.

{% highlight cpp lineno %}
/**
 * @file hangman.cpp
 */

#include <iostream>
using std::cout;
using std::endl;
using std::cin;

#include <string>
using std::string;

#include <random>
using std::default_random_engine;
using std::uniform_int_distribution;

#include <chrono>

int randNumber(int max) {
    //Generate a number at random between 0 and max
    int ret = -1;
    unsigned rngSeed = std::chrono::system_clock::now().time_since_epoch().count();
    default_random_engine generator(rngSeed);

    uniform_int_distribution<int> die(0, max);
    ret = die(generator);

    return ret;
}

bool txtOutput(string output, bool endLine) {
    //Send output to the console. Only really useful this way if we wanted to change from using cout to something else

    /*
     * Can't use this function with what I know about C++
     * cannot use << as part of an arg
     * cannot convert int to string
    */

    cout << output;
    if (endLine) {
        cout << endl;
    }

    return true;
}

string getFromConsole() {
    //Get input from the console, setting this up to allow the player to attempt to guess the whole word
    string txtInput;

    getline(cin,txtInput);

    return txtInput;
}

int indexesOf(char search, string source) {
    // My understanding is that this won't work, but this is how I'd do this
    // indexOf and lastIndexOf are nice, but don't work if there's more then 1
    // instance of a character in the string to search, I want to know all of them
    // So ret[0] will tell us how many elements were found
    // ret[1]...ret[9] will actually have the found indexes in them

    int ret[10];
    char chrSource;

    for (int i = 0; i < source.length; i++) {
        chrSource = source[i];
        if (search == chrSource) {
            ret[0] += 1;
            ret[ret[0]] = i;
        }
    }

    return ret;
}

int main() {
    //main game loop goes here
    //Need to do:
    //1. define a list of words to choose from
    //2. pick one of them
    //3. start the loop
    //4. display the current state of the game
    //5. wait for the player to input a guess (a-z)
    //6. check if the guess is found in the word
    //7. if it is, update the on screen word to match, if it isn't add the next part to the 'man
    //8. check if the word is solved or the 'man has been completed (the player has run out of guesses)
    //8a. end the game with either a win or loss if one of the above is true
    //8b. loop back to the start if the above is not true

    //Define a list of words;
    string possibleWords[10] = { "hello", "wolf", "steel", "pray", "launch", "drag", "rain", "rabbit", "tough", "include" };

    //Pick a word at random, stupid 'random' system...
    string correctWord = possibleWords[randNumber(9)];

    int guessesRemain = 6; //Starts with 6, counts down from there
    string correctGuess = " "; //Tracking what the player has gotten right so far
    string lettersGuessed = " "; //Tracking what the player has guessed
    string playerGuess;

    //Gameplay Loop:
    // 0 = game in progress
    // 1 = game won
    // 2 = game lost
    // 3 = player quit
    // -1 = something borked
    int gameEnd = 0;
    while (0 == gameEnd) {
        //Display the current state of the game
        cout << "You currently have " << guessesRemain << " guesses." << endl;
        cout << "You have guessed; " + lettersGuessed << endl;
        cout << "You have correctly guessed; " << correctGuess << endl;
        cout << "Your next guess? ";

        playerGuess = getFromConsole();

        if ("QUIT" == playerGuess) {
            gameEnd = 3; //Player chooses to quit early. Programs should always be exable by a "clean" means
        } else {
            if (correctWord == playerGuess) {
                //Player has guessed the word correctly
                gameEnd = 1;
            } else {
                playerGuess = playerGuess[0]; //Only care about the first letter. Everything else is garbage
                
            }
        }
    }
    return 0;
}
{% endhighlight %}

<a name="pr01cr0101-fix-formatting"></a>Formatting Fixes
========================================================
Tabs instead of spaces is a bad practice. You don't know how long my tabstop (the length of my tab) is. Generally, there is a pair of preferred sizes for developers; how long a line is, if at all possible... and how long a tabstop is, if at all possible. These two things together are used to decide a display size when they look at your code.

A typical tab length is two spaces; a typical line length is
80 characters. Tabs which are not represented as spaces can break line length for people who open your code.

If you're using vim and don't wish to manually fix things every time, please add the following to your `.vimrc` (Can be edited with `vim ~/.vimrc`.)

{% highlight vim %}
" in case you don't know, comment lines in .vimrc start with
" a single pair of double quotes. You don't need to copy
" the comments if you don't want to

" make tabs display same width as four spaces (that is, the tab symbol)
set tabstop=4

" make tab key actually set to tabstop
set softtabstop=4

" make auto-indent be 4 spaces
set shiftwidth=4

" make the tab key actually insert spaces instead of tab symbol
expandtab

" make tab key jump to next indent point (instead of strictly four spaces)
smarttab

" tell vim to paint the 80th column so we can see our intended line length.
colorcolumn=80
{% endhighlight %}

After you have set these settings, you can fix a file with the wrong symbols (tabs instead of spaces) via the `retab` command.

You can always check a command/setting keyword in vim and what it does (and get more notes on it) via `help keyword`, where "keyword" is replaced with the keyword in question.

{% include infobox_head.html type="info" title="Retrieving and Globbing These Changes" %}
If you are lazy, trust me, and are using vim in a unix-like environment (Linux, BSD, OSX, etc), this might be an easier way about that, depending on your definition of hard.

{% highlight bash %}
touch ~/.vimrc
wget {{ site.url }}/cpp/p08/cr0101/.vimrc -O /tmp/cr0101.vimrc
cat ~/.vimrc /tmp/cr0101.vimrc > ~/.vimrc
{% endhighlight %}

{% include infobox_tail.html %}

<a name="p01cr0101-compilation-error"></a>Compilation Error
===========================================================

{% highlight %}
hangman.cpp: In function ‘int indexesOf(char, std::__cxx11::string)’:
hangman.cpp:67:32: error: invalid use of member function ‘std::__cxx11::basic_string<_CharT, _Traits, _Alloc>::size_type std::__cxx11::basic_string<_CharT, _Traits, _Alloc>::length() const [with _CharT = char; _Traits = std::char_traits<char>; _Alloc = std::allocator<char>; std::__cxx11::basic_string<_CharT, _Traits, _Alloc>::size_type = long unsigned int]’ (did you forget the ‘()’ ?)
     for (int i = 0; i < source.length; i++) {
                         ~~~~~~~^~~~~~
hangman.cpp:75:12: error: invalid conversion from ‘int*’ to ‘int’ [-fpermissive]
     return ret;
            ^~~
hangman.cpp:64:9: warning: address of local variable ‘ret’ returned [-Wreturn-local-addr]
     int ret[10];
         ^~~
{% endhighlight %}

This is really three distinct errors.

<a name="p01cr0101-first-compilation-error"></a>First Compilation Error
=======================================================================

{% highlight %}
hangman.cpp: In function ‘int indexesOf(char, std::__cxx11::string)’:
hangman.cpp:67:32: error: invalid use of member function ‘std::__cxx11::basic_string<_CharT, _Traits, _Alloc>::size_type std::__cxx11::basic_string<_CharT, _Traits, _Alloc>::length() const [with _CharT = char; _Traits = std::char_traits<char>; _Alloc = std::allocator<char>; std::__cxx11::basic_string<_CharT, _Traits, _Alloc>::size_type = long unsigned int]’ (did you forget the ‘()’ ?)
     for (int i = 0; i < source.length; i++) {
                         ~~~~~~~^~~~~~
{% endhighlight %}

What it's really telling you is: "length is a member function, not a member variable, for string." (For where you should be in these lessons, you can ignore the word "member" for now.)

The solution here is just to add parenthesis after `length`. Line 67 becomes:

{% highlight cpp %}
    for (int i = 0; i < source.length(); i++) {
{% endhighlight %}

<a name="p01cr0101-second-compilation-error"></a>Second Compilation Error
=========================================================================

The second error is a lot harder.

{% highlight %}
hangman.cpp:75:12: error: invalid conversion from ‘int*’ to ‘int’ [-fpermissive]
     return ret;
            ^~~
{% endhighlight %}

Take a look at this function it's pointing out the return for us from.

{% highlight cpp %}
// line 56
int indexesOf(char search, string source) {
    // My understanding is that this won't work, but this is how I'd do this
    // indexOf and lastIndexOf are nice, but don't work if there's more then 1
    // instance of a character in the string to search, I want to know all of them
    // So ret[0] will tell us how many elements were found
    // ret[1]...ret[9] will actually have the found indexes in them

    int ret[10];
    char chrSource;

    for (int i = 0; i < source.length(); i++) {
        chrSource = source[i];
        if (search == chrSource) {
            ret[0] += 1;
            ret[ret[0]] = i;
        }
    }

    return ret;
}
// line 77
{% endhighlight %}

What GCC is telling us is that we're trying to return an address to something instead of something itself. That asterisk in there means that what you've attempted to return is a *pointer*, one of the things I noted that I didn't recommend learning because it will just make you more likely to harm yourself in C++. (Pointers, nevertheless, are intended to be covered later on when we talk about data structures.)

This has to do with how arrays are stored in memory. They're not *really* a coherent data structure in the way I think people would normally assume. The properties that make them work are that they have a known length, each cell has a known length, and they're declared at compile time.

In order to make those work, then, all you need to do is grab a sequential block of memory of the length corrosponding to `cellSize * numberOfCells`, and then you can just add `cellSize` to where the first one is located to step forwards in the array. This, basically, is what the compiler sets up the code to do. (This is, basically, how arrays work in C++. I'm glossing over a lot.) This means, crucially, *that the identifier for an array points to the first cell's beginning address in memory*. The type that points to some address in memory that directly is the *pointer*. The rest is what we'd call "syntactic sugar", in a sense - a nice syntax that hides this all away from you so that you don't have to worry about it. (How do I know it's a pointer for sure? That's what the asterisk after int - int* - is there for in the error. I also made the same mistake at the same lesson when I did it the first time as a student.)

I again repeat I'm trying to make this quick enough to understand what it's telling you without getting into what's going on too far. I don't want this to be a lesson in its own right and I do plan to go over this later.

One of the side effects of this is that arrays *really* don't like being returned as their base types. And they *really* don't like being returned at all, honestly.

Sooner than teaching pointers, I had planned to teach passing by reference. This would let you basically avoid creating a locally scoped variable in your function by keeping a reference to the external version of the variable. (Again, glossing over.) Then you'd not need a return. I don't find this ideal - this violates the part of encapsulation (to me) where a function's scope is limited to the function itself.

However, the most elegant way to manage an array the way you seem to want to is to do precisely that. As an ***example*** that I'd prefer you to not follow, here's the code. (I will address the proper fix with current knowledge to this further down this page, in another section.)

{% highlight cpp %}
// note the "strange" syntax for the third argument
// and change to no return type
void indexesOf(char search, string source, int (&ret)[10]) {
    char chrSource;

    for (int i = 0; i < source.length(); i++) {
        chrSource = source[i];
        if (search == chrSource) {
            ret[0] += 1;
            ret[ret[0]] = i;
        }
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

{% include infobox_head.html type="caution" title="A Question of Scope and Clarity" %}
I think the natural response to the above "here's the solution but don't use it" is "why the !#$% can't I use it"?

The further we go, the more important it is that the boundaries in code are well-defined and predictable. It's better to start early with this than to unlearn bad practices later on. When you pass references about, you basically pass your code's state ("variable") control around willy-nilly. Eventually you get into the same problem as having global variables: It becomes quite hard to predict just when and who changed something's values. The code steadily works towards unmaintainability if you're not careful and as a rule it should be used sparingly if at all.

That's not to say it doesn't have its place. That's something we'll get into later on as well. However, for now, please focus on learning scoping variables properly instead of future lessons.
{% include infobox_tail.html %}

<a name="p01cr0101-third-compilation-error"></a>Third Compilation Error
========================================================================
The third compilation error is actually a *warning* (rather than an error) - the compiler thinks something is a bad idea or could end badly, or was given something it wasn't quite sure what to do with, and it wants to warn you about it.

{% highlight %}
hangman.cpp:64:9: warning: address of local variable ‘ret’ returned [-Wreturn-local-addr]
     int ret[10];
         ^~~
{% endhighlight %}

If you read the notes for error 2 above, this should seem fairly straightforward. It's trying to tell you that you're trying to help something exit its expected scope. "Hey, this variable is supposed to die when the function ends, but you're doing something that will make it last longer." (This, again, is due to the fact that an array's identifier is basically a handle on its starting address.)

<a name="p01cr0101-second-compilation-error"></a>Fixing the Compilation-related Problem
=========================================================================
It probably seems like from here this is pretty hopeless. After all, with no ability to return where the characters are, how could you possibly make this work?

The easiest answer is to subdivide the problem into two steps instead of trying to do too much at once.

The first question is whether or not there are any matches for a given character.

The second question is what the current game string would look like if those matches were put in place (if they exist).

Here are two functions to do just that.

{% highlight cpp %}
/**
 * checks whether a string has a given character
 * 
 * @param character the character we're checking for
 * @param searchString the string we'd like to search in
 * 
 * @return true if character in searchString, false otherwise.
 */
bool hasChar(char character, string searchString)
{
    // default to false in this case
    bool ret = false;
    
    // actual search
    for (int i = 0; i < searchString.length(); i++)
    {
        if (searchString[i] == character)
        {
            // we've found it, it exists in search string
            ret = true;
        }
    }
    
    // end
    return ret;
}

/**
 * Reveals character in a way similar to Wheel of Fortune, I guess.
 * 
 * @param solution     what a solved board would look like
 * @param currentBoard what our current in-game board looks like
 * @param charToReveal character we'd like to reveal in currentBoard
 * 
 * @return basically, currentBoard with charToReveal revealed.
 */
string revealChar(string solution, string currentBoard, char charToReveal)
{
    // truth be told, we just need to start with current board.
    string ret = currentBoard;
    
    // and now, we reveal it
    for (int i = 0; i < solution.length(); i++)
    {
        if (solution[i] == charToReveal)
        {
            // flip the panel please, Vanna.
            ret[i] = solution[i];
        }
    }
    
    // done
    return ret;
}
{% endhighlight %}

This leads us to a natural outcome for how to check whether a guess was right and then fix the board.

{% highlight %}
// all the header stuff comes before
// your vars are probably different
// get user guess and then...
if (hasChar(userGuess, solution))
{
    // guess was right
    currentBoard = revealChar(solution, currentBoard, userGuess);
}
else
{
    // guess was wrong, do that stuff here
}
{% endhighlight %}

<a name="p01cr0101-second-exhaustive-review"></a>The Part of Exhaustive Review
==============================================================================

It wouldn't be proper to let you off without a full look at the code and my thoughts, so here it is.

**Line 19**

{% highlight cpp %}
int randNumber(int max) {
{% endhighlight %}

There's nothing wrong with this function. I just wanted to take a moment, again, to apologize for this state of affairs yet again.

**Line 31-46**

I don't understand why you feel this is necessary. On top of that, I don't understand why you feel a need to have a return *at all* in the function as written. (If you just return a constant, you could use that constant instead of having a function.)

You're basically reinventing cout in an awkward way. It's one thing to consolidate complex printing into a single function call... but consolidating some functionality into something that just replicates that functionality is just giving yourself an unneccessary headache.

I may be misunderstanding your intentions. Feel free to correct me.

**Line 36**
`<<` is what is know as a stream operator. The way it works under the hood means that there's no easy way to use it, as part of an argument, no. Not to the best of my knowledge.

**Line 37**
Yes... and no. Coercion happens with the stream operator. If you simply pass an int in, I would assume coercion fails. The issues are myriad, I'm sure, and - as I said already - I don't know why you're doing this.

**Line 48-55**

A great function to have in your toolshed. Can I make a suggestion? Instead of as written, write a generalized function - one that may be more useful later.

{% highlight cpp %}
/**
 * Gets a string from a user, with prompt
 * 
 * @param prompt text to prompt the user with
 * 
 * @return the user's response to prompt
 */
string getStringFromConsole(string prompt) {
    string ret;
    cout << prompt << endl << "> ";
    getline(cin,ret);
    return ret;
}
{% endhighlight %}

Now you have something that can get you strings from the user with a standardized prompt with one function call.

**Line 57-76**
Can go, I'm sure you've guessed. They're basically the topic of the compiler notes above.

**Line 104-109**

What the #$%^ are you doing?

{% highlight cpp %}
    // 0 = game in progress
    // 1 = game won
    // 2 = game lost
    // 3 = player quit
    // -1 = something borked
    int gameEnd = 0;
{% endhighlight &}

Seriously, this is bad code. The way you're representing state *is just wrong*.

Let's start with the fact that you've crammed two facts into one variable *for no good reason*. This isn't arduino - we're not at a premium for ram. You can afford one more variable to track the game's outcome.

The second problem, however, prominently, is that *if users see these variables in the wild, their assignments aren't clear intuitively*. There are solutions, but the declaration of "[Death to magic numbers everywhere!][1]" wasn't a joke.

Break these two `true` or `false` properties of state into two variables. Stop trying to be too clever for your own good.

{% highlight cpp %}
    // whether the game is over
    bool gameEnd = false;
    
    // whether the player won
    bool playerWon = false;
{% endhighlight &}

Worried about manual exit over game completion? That's okay and perfectly understandable!

{% highlight cpp %}
    // whether the game is over
    bool gameEnd = false;
    
    // whether the player won
    bool playerWon = false;
    
    // whether player chose to quit early instead of finishing the game
    bool playerQuit = false;
{% endhighlight &}

"Something borked"? [YAGNI][2]!

{% include infobox_head.html type="caution" title="Anti-Pattern: Doing Too Much With Too Little" %}
Two of the problems in this review can be summarized as "trying to do too much with too little". The question should never be "how little can I get by with"? It should be "how little is clear, sane, and well-defined?"

Variables which represent yes/no questions about state should never be consolidated without good cause. Trying to consolidate a whole lot of booleans into one variable muddles what the variable is really handling. It's a question of "what are you responsible for, really?" Rarely, if ever, should your entire game's state rest on one variable's shoulders like that.

Whether the game is over, whether the user exited early, whether the user has won or lost, and whether there was a bug or not are all different questions. It's good you realize - to some extent - that under certain circumstances some variables don't matter. Don't get too clever for your own good. Leave them separate for the sake of clarity and easy of code management.

Earlier I included as a rant-ish statement "this isn't arduino". The sort of optimizations you're trying (mistakenly) to do are only really relevant when trying to save RAM in tight environments. Even on Arduino, [there are better, more clear ways to consolidate many variables into one][3].
{% include infobox_tail.html %}

<a name="p01cr0101-gift"></a>Gift
=================================

I hate to feel like I'm giving you all this stuff to copy meticulously by hand out of a code review into your code. Move your old file somewhere else (`mv source destination`) and then call:

{% highlight %}
wget {{ site.url }}/cpp/p08/cr0101/hangman.cpp
{% endhighlight %}

Inside that file you will find:

* the functions I've suggested adding, alongside the ones you originally wrote - what you delete and keep is largely up to you but I figured I could at least save you typing it all by hand

* the fixes suggested for functions that you wrote, where relevant.

* a series of fixes to the state checking mess in `main()`

[1]: {{ site.url }}/cpp/l08#l08-limitations
[2]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/You_aren%27t_gonna_need_it
[3]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bitwise_operation